green buildings minimize the human
impacts upon the natural environment by
reducing pollution and avoiding the
extinction of species and other harmful
outcomes that jeopardize our precious
planet the Walter L rice education
building is the first building in
Virginia to be certified LEED Platinum
which recognizes the highest level of
sustainable architecture in the United
States
LEED a rating system developed by the US
Green Building Council is the acronym
for Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design the lead system
encompasses various interlocking design
components that encourage an interplay
between architecture and nature the
primary design principle is that the
building's location and its orientation
not encroach upon the surrounding
environment any more than necessary
landscaping with indigenous species and
installing vegetated roof systems to
decrease the heat island effect are also
key elements of sustainable design
control of stormwater runoff by
installing pervious driveways in rain
gardens decreased erosion and thus
preserved soil a geothermal system using
the natural temperature of the ground
around the education building provides
highly efficient heating and cooling and
thus promotes sustainable energy use
photovoltaic panels atop the boathouse
our site Adelman James River and supply
electricity to the education building
operable windows allow for effective
natural ventilation you might be
surprised and delighted to know that
even something as mundane as rainwater
has a purpose in this building it is
collected to flush the toilets together
with an on-site wastewater treatment
system there is a 45% reduction in water
use below a mandated baseline
requirement and a 100 percent reduction
in potable water in the sewer conveyance
high efficiency interior and exterior
lighting are additional components of
LEED buildings soy based products and
recycled denim insulate the walls of the
building furthermore 25% of all of the
building's construction materials was
harvested and/or manufactured regionally
low emission paints coatings and
composite would provide the finishing
touches on the spectacular building the
Walter L rice education building matches
the color and mood of the surrounding
habitat featuring a gorgeous natural
wood exterior balanced with a more
modern interior complete with GREENGUARD
certified furnishings
large windows allow for plenty of
natural daylight for an airy feeling
inside the comfortable space the four
thousand nine hundred square foot
building supports administrative work
space a conference room and an academic
study area additionally to teaching labs
accommodate sixteen students each while
a multi-purpose room has seats up to 70
an adjacent education pavilion functions
as a pleasant open-air classroom for 30
people
VCU undergraduate and graduate students
as well as faculty make use of this
building K through 12 students and their
teachers also visit the site to
participate in the many environmental
outreach programs offered by the VCU
Rice Center this exciting addition to
the inventory of VCU buildings cost 2.6
million dollars to construct and
represents the completion of phase 1 in
the VCU rice center development plan the
scenic 342 acre biological field station
serves to teach and encourage
environmentally focused research as well
as offer volunteered opportunities for a
happier and healthier Earth the VCU rice
center supports a variety of habitats
ranging from the James River to vernal
pools from hardwood forests to tidal and
non-tidal wetlands and from open meadows
to thick pine forests
the vco rice centers mission is clear to
provide a location for VCU students and
faculty to engage in research and
service activities related to the study
and preservation of large River
ecosystems and riparian habitats this
certified LEED Platinum facility is but
the first of many VCU LEED buildings to
come to learn more about the Inger and
Walter rice Center for Environmental
Life Sciences the Walter L rice
education building and its fascinating
research projects please visit our
website
you